#summary Instructions for installing and running FITS.

= Install FITS Code =
From this Downloads section of this website, download the file named fits-(version).zip, for example fits-0.2.5.zip. *The FITS source is included in this ZIP file.*

Create a new directory on your computer and unzip the contents of the FITS ZIP file to the directory.

= Running FITS (command-line option) =

The way you run FITS will depend on your operating system. *Note that FITS also has a Java API that should be considered for use when processing a large number of files on an on-going basis.* 

== Windows ==
These instructions describe how to run FITS in a Terminal window. There are other ways you could run FITS on Windows, including from the Windows Explorer, and using the Java API.

  # Open up a command line interface.
    * Click on Start -> Click on Run -> Type in cmd
  # Navigate to the directory where you installed FITS, for example:
    * cd "Program Files"\fits\fits-0.2.5
  # Run the script names fits.bat
    * >fits.bat
  # You should see the FITS usage print out
  # Run FITS against a file using the -i parameter, for example:
    * >fits.bat -i "..\..\..\Documents and Settings\agoethals\Desktop\9198541.arc.gz"
  # You should see the FITS XML output to your terminal screen.
  # Save FITS XML output to a file using the -o parameter, for example:
    * >fits.bat -i "..\..\..\Documents and Settings\agoethals\Desktop\9198541.arc.gz" -o "..\..\..\Documents and Settings\agoethals\temp\fits_9198541.arc.gz.xml"


== Unix ==
These instructions describe how to run FITS in a terminal window. You could also run FITS on Unix using the Java API.

  # Open up a terminal window.
  # Navigate to the directory where you installed FITS
  # If it not already, make the fits.sh file executable
    * chmod +x fits.sh
  # Run the script named fits.sh
    * ./fits.sh